KOGITO-7309 Integration tests with PostgreSQL (#34)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/testing-and-troubleshooting/integration-tests-with-postgresql.adoc

= Serverless Workflow integration test with PostgreSQL
==========================================================
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Serverless Workflow integration test with PostgreSQL
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, quarkus-cli, test, integration, postgreSQL
// Referenced documentation pages.
:basic-integration-test-with-restassured: xref:testing-and-troubleshooting/basic-integration-tests-with-restassured.adoc
:mocking-opnapi-services-with-wiremock: xref:testing-and-troubleshooting/mocking-opnapi-services-with-wiremock.adoc
:mocking-http-cloudevents-with-wiremock: xref:testing-and-troubleshooting/mocking-http-cloudevents-with-wiremock.adoc
// External pages
:quarkus_testing_guide_integration_test: {quarkus_testing_guide}#quarkus-integration-test
:quarkus_testing_guide_test_resource: {quarkus_testing_guide}#quarkus-test-resource

> :availableTestcontainers: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/tree/main/kogito-test-utils/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/testcontainers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:available_test_containers_url: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/tree/main/kogito-test-utils/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/testcontainers
```

> :quarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager_class: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/main/test-framework/common/src/main/java/io/quarkus/test/common/QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager.java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:quarkus_test_resource_lifecycle_manager_class: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/main/test-framework/common/src/main/java/io/quarkus/test/common/QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager.java
```

* *@QuarkusTestResource* allows you to define test resources that need to be started before running the test. For more details see
{quarkus_testing_guide_test_resource}[Starting services before the Quarkus application starts] guide.
* *Kogito-quarkus-test-utils* with some Kogito predefined testcontainers as the PostgreSQL one.

The testing case followed in this document is based on the `serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription` example application.
You can access this example application in {kogito_sw_examples_url}[Kogito Examples] GitHub repository.

[[creating-integration-test]]
== Creating the integration test with PostgreSQL
Let's create the integration test for a specific Kogito Serverless Workflow with PostgresQL:

First, first make sure that the Application's 'pom.xml' have the `kogito-quarkus-test-utils` dependency.
--

.Dependencies in `pom.xml` file
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
  <artifactId>kogito-quarkus-test-utils</artifactId>
  <scope>test</scope>
</dependency>
----
--
This allows us to use predefined test resources such as: **PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource**

[NOTE]
====

> This test framework allows the usage of predefined test resources,  you can see {availableTestcontainers}[here] that can be used to test more complex scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This test framework allows the usage of predefined test resources,  you can see {available_test_containers_url}[here] that can be used to test more complex scenarios.
```

PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource is a predefined test resource provided by kogito-quarkus-test-utils that starts a container with the PostgreSQL instance.
That container has a full set of default configuration that are included in the integration test automatically

[NOTE]
====
As a test resource, it will run its {quarkus_test_tesource_lifecycle_manager_class}[QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager] before the service test execution. More related info in {quarkus_testing_guide_test_resource}[Starting services before the Quarkus application starts].
====

The container has a full set of default configuration, such as PostgreSQL docker image name, default user, default password,...
All the needed configuration values to link the Kogito Serverless Workflow service with that instance, are added automatically to the integration test.

.Properties added automatically by PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource
[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.reactive.url
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url
quarkus.datasource.username
quarkus.datasource.password
----

[[Add-conditional-postgreSQL-test-resource]]
== Conditional PostgreSQL test resource

> This test resource can be disabled by a configuration like it's done in the `serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription` example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This test resource can be disabled by a configuration like it's done in the `serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription` example.
```

Also, please add the link

This allows you to reuse the same integration test with PostgreSQL enabled just for profiles with persistence enabled.
In order to achieve this resource activation we have created this local test resource:

.Conditional test resource creation
[source,java]
----
@QuarkusIntegrationTest
@QuarkusTestResource(SubscriptionResourceIT.ConditionalPostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource.class)
public class SubscriptionResourceIT {
    ...
    public static class ConditionalPostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource extends PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource {

        public ConditionalPostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource() {
            enableConditional();
        }

        private boolean isEnabled() {
            return Optional.ofNullable(System.getProperty("enable.resource.postgresql")).map(property -> property.equalsIgnoreCase(Boolean.TRUE.toString())).orElse(false);
        }

        @Override
        protected Map<String, String> getProperties() {
            return isEnabled() ? super.getProperties() : new HashMap<>();
        }
    }
}
----

> This new resource ConditionalPostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource only will be started when the `enable.resource.postgresql` system property is true.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This new resource `ConditionalPostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource` only will be started when the `enable.resource.postgresql` system property is true.
```

> In the example, the `persistence` profile incorporates this property setting to execute the integration test with the ConditionalPostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example, the `persistence` profile incorporates this property setting to execute the integration test with the `ConditionalPostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource` enabled.
```

What do you mean by "property setting"?

Reviewer 2: Maybe also explain why the Maven profile was added. See this example: https://kiegroup.github.io/kogito-docs/serverlessworkflow/main/cloud/build-workflow-image-with-quarkus-cli.html#proc-building-serverless-workflow-application

"Step 3: alternatively, you can use a Maven profile to..."

I think you can consider taking this "procedure" approach here too since you're describing a sequence of steps to achieve a certain goal.

.Example of profile definition that runs the integration test with ConditionalPostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource enabled
[source,xml]
----
 <profile>
   <id>persistence</id>
   <activation>
     <property>
       <name>persistence</name>
     </property>
   </activation>
   <properties>
     <quarkus.profile>persistence</quarkus.profile>
     <enable.resource.postgresql>true</enable.resource.postgresql>
     <quarkus.datasource.devservices.enabled>true</quarkus.datasource.devservices.enabled>
   </properties>
 </profile>
----

[[execute-integrationtest]]
== Execute integration test

> To run the test with the PostgreSQLQuarkusTestResource enabled, execute the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run the test with the `PostgreSQLQuarkusTestResource` enabled, execute the following command:
```

with a PostgreSQL database instance.

In order to simulate that scenario and verify the service behavior, we are using different Quarkus annotations and tools
 that simplify this work like:

* *@QuarkusIntegrationTest* will be used to launch and test the artifact produced by the Serverless Workflow Quarkus build. For more
details see {quarkus_testing_guide_integration_test}[@QuarkusIntegrationTest] guide.
* *@QuarkusTestResource* allows us to define test resources that need to be started before running the test. For more details see
{quarkus_testing_guide_test_resource}[Starting services before the Quarkus application starts] guide.
* *Kogito-quarkus-test-utils* with some Kogito predefined testcontainers as the PostgreSQL one.

The testing case followed in this document is based on the `serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription` example application.
You can access this example application in {kogito_sw_examples_url}[Kogito Examples] GitHub repository.

[[creating-integration-test]]
== Creating the integration test with PostgreSQL
Let's create the integration test for a specific Kogito Serverless Workflow with PostgresQL:

> First, we need to include the dependency to kogito-quarkus-test-utils at the project pom.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, first make sure that the Applications's 'pom.xml' have the `kogito-quarkus-test-utils` dependency.
```

--

.Dependencies in `pom.xml` file
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
  <artifactId>kogito-quarkus-test-utils</artifactId>
  <scope>test</scope>
</dependency>
----
--

> This allows us to use predefined test resources such the one we need in this case for PostgreSQL: PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows us to use predefined test resources such as: **PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource**
```

[NOTE]
====

> This test framework allows the use of predefined test resources you can see {availableTestcontainers}[here] that can be used to test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This test framework allows the usege of predefined test resources,  you can see {availableTestcontainers}[here] ehat can be used to test.
```

more complex scenarios
====

> The next step would be to add the test annotations to the integration test resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Neext, add the test annotations to the integration test resources as the example below:
```

.Example integration test annotation
[source,java]
----
@QuarkusIntegrationTest <1>
@QuarkusTestResource(PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource.class) <2>
class HelloTestIT {<3>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

= Serverless Workflow integration test with postgreSQL
==========================================================
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Serverless Workflow integration test with postgreSQL
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, quarkus-cli, test, integration, postgreSQL
// Referenced documentation pages.
:basic-integration-test-with-restassured: xref:testing-and-troubleshooting/basic-integration-tests-with-restassured.adoc
:mocking-opnapi-services-with-wiremock: xref:testing-and-troubleshooting/mocking-opnapi-services-with-wiremock.adoc
:mocking-http-cloudevents-with-wiremock: xref:testing-and-troubleshooting/mocking-http-cloudevents-with-wiremock.adoc
// External pages

> :kogito_sw_examples_git_repo_url: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples.git

Author: @ricardozanini it was there, thanks!

> :quarkus_testing_guide: https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing

Author: added quarkus_testing_guide to antora.yaml

:quarkus_testing_guide_integration_test: https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing#quarkus-integration-test
:quarkus_testing_guide_test_resource: https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing#quarkus-test-resource

This document describes how to test your Serverless Workflow application integrated with PostgreSQL persistence.

[[integration-test-overview]]
== Overview of Quarkus Integration testing

> The goal is to be able to launch and test the artifact produced by the Quarkus builds and verify its interaction

Author: @spolti you mean to put in all the guides the prerequisite of cloning the example? I think the 'Creating the integration test with PostgreSQL' would cover the needed verification to make the test run.
If you mean 'The rest of prerequisites' like  Java 11+ installed, Environment variable JAVA_HOME set accordingly, Maven 3.8.1+ installed, GraalVm,.. I think they are covered in each example. Is it worth putting that in every guide that makes reference to an example?

> The goal is to be able to launch and test the artifact produced by the Quarkus builds and verify its interaction

Reviewer: no, if there is any specific to this one.
a maven, java, etc, are prerequisites, maybe link to another guide, like creating your first Serverless Workflow applicaiton or just refer to a Kogito example, wdyt?

with a PostgreSQL database instance.

> In order to simulate that scenario and verify the service behaviour, we are using different Quarkus annotations and tools

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to simulate that scenario and verify the service behavior, we are using different Quarkus annotations and tools
```

 that simplify this work like:

* *@QuarkusIntegrationTest* will be used to launch and test the artifact produced by the Serverless Workflow Quarkus build. For more
details see {quarkus_testing_guide_integration_test}[@QuarkusIntegrationTest] guide.
* *@QuarkusTestResource* allows us to define test resources that need to be started before running the test. For more details see
{quarkus_testing_guide_test_resource}[Starting services before the Quarkus application starts] guide.
* *Kogito-quarkus-test-utils* with some Kogito predefined testcontainers as the PostgreSQL one.

The testing case followed in this document is based on the `serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription` example application.

> You can access this example application in {kogito_sw_examples_git_repo_url}[Kogito Examples] GitHub repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can access this example application in {kogito_sw_examples_git_repo_url}[Kogito Examples] GitHub repository.
```

[[creating-integration-test]]

> == Creating the integration test with postgreSQL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Creating the Integration Test with PostgreSQL
```

Let's create the integration test for a specific Serverless Workflow with PostgresQL:

First, we need to include the dependency to kogito-quarkus-test-utils at the project pom.xml
--

.Dependencies in `pom.xml` file
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
  <artifactId>kogito-quarkus-test-utils</artifactId>
  <scope>test</scope>
</dependency>
----
--
This allows us to use predefined test resources such the one we need in this case for PostgreSQL: PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource

[NOTE]
====
This test framework allows the use of predefined test resources like: KafkaQuarkusTestResource, KeycloakQuarkusTestResource that can be used to test
more complex scenarios
====

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you please add references to these classes? A reader might feel lost entirely without a reference to these resources.

Author: @ricardozanini I've added the reference to  availableTestContainters in github. Is this what you mean with that reference?

The next step would be to add the test annotations to the integration test resources

.Example integration test annotation
[source,java]
----
@QuarkusIntegrationTest <1>
@QuarkusTestResource(PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource.class) <2>
class HelloTestIT {<3>

}
----

<1> Allows launch and test the artifact produced by the Quarkus build. Supports testing a jar (of whichever type), a native image or container image
<2> Add the reference to the predefined PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource in kogito-quarkus-test-utils. The annotation
@QuarkusTestResource makes Quarkus run the corresponding QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager before any tests are run.
<3> The naming of the test would end with 'IT' to identify which test needs to be executed as an integration test.

> Once the needed resources and annotation are specified, We can start testing the different interactions with the Serverless Workflow like it
>  is explained in {basic-integration-test-with-restassured}[Testing your Serverless Workflow application using REST Assured].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you specify the required resources and annotations, you can start testing the different interactions with the application as the guide link:{basic-integration-test-with-restassured}[Testing your Serverless Workflow application using REST Assured] describes.
```

[[Add-postgreSQL-test-resource]]
== PostgreSQL instance as test resource
The test are using PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource to start the PostgresSQL instance. PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource is a predefined test
 resource provided by kogito-quarkus-test-utils that starts a container with the PostgreSQL instance. That container has a full set of

>  default configuration that are included in the integration test automatically

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can avoid making hard-break lines and try to shorten the paragraph.

[NOTE]
====
As a test resource, it will run its QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager before the service tests are executed.
More related info in {quarkus_testing_guide_test_resource}[TESTING YOUR APPLICATION] Quarkus guide.

> ====

Reviewer 2: Is there a direct anchor/link to the class `QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager` in this guide you linked here? If so, what do you think about adding it here?

> The container has a full set of default configuration, such as PostgreSQL docker image name, default user, default password,...
>  all the needed configuration values to link the Serverless Workflow service with that instance are added automatically to the integration test.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The container has a complete set of default configurations, such as PostgreSQL docker image name, default user, default password, etc.

All the needed configuration values to link the Serverless Workflow service with that instance are added automatically to the integration test.
```

.Properties added automatically by PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource
[source, properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.reactive.url
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url
quarkus.datasource.username
quarkus.datasource.password
----

[[Add-conditional-postgreSQL-test-resource]]
== Conditional PostgreSQL test resource

This test resource can be disabled by a configuration like it's done in the `serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription` example.

> This allows us to reuse the same integration test with PostgreSQL enabled just for profiles with persistence enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows you to reuse the same integration test with PostgreSQL enabled just for profiles with persistence enabled.
```

[source,xml]
----
 <profile>
   <id>persistence</id>
   <activation>
     <property>
       <name>persistence</name>
     </property>
   </activation>
   <properties>
     <quarkus.profile>persistence</quarkus.profile>
     <enable.resource.postgresql>true</enable.resource.postgresql>
     <quarkus.datasource.devservices.enabled>true</quarkus.datasource.devservices.enabled>
   </properties>
 </profile>
----

[[execute-integrationtest]]
== Execute integration test

To run the test with the PostgreSQLQuarkusTestResource enabled, execute the following command:

--
.Command to run a test
[source,shell]
----
mvn clean verify
----

Or in case of the Conditional Quarkus test resource and the `persistence` profile includes  `<enable.resource.postgresql>true</enable.resource.postgresql>`
.Command to run a test with an specific profile
[source,shell]
----
mvn clean verify -Ppersistence
----

or enabling directly throw the command line
.Command to run a test enabling the ConditionalPostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource through command line
[source,shell]
----
mvn clean verify -Denable.resource.postgresql=true
----

> The testing procedure in this document is based on the `serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription`
>  example application. You can access this example application in {kogito_sw_examples_git_repo_url}[Kogito Examples] GitHub repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The testing procedure in this document is based on the `serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription` example application.
You can access this example application in {kogito_sw_examples_git_repo_url}[Kogito Examples] GitHub repository
```

= Serverless Workflow integration test with PostgreSQL
==========================================================
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Serverless Workflow integration test with PostgreSQL

> :keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, quarkus-cli, test, integration, postgreSQL

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, quarkus-cli, test, integration, postgresql
```

:PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource_class: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/blob/main/quarkus/test/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/testcontainers/quarkus/PostgreSqlQuarkusTestResource.java
:kogito_test_utils: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/tree/main/kogito-test-utils
:kogito_test_utils_pom: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/tree/main/kogito-test-utils/pom.xml
:kogito_sw_newsletter_example: {kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription
:kogito_sw_newsletter_example_SubscriptionResourceIT_class: {kogito_sw_newsletter_example}/subscription-service/src/test/java/org/acme/newsletter/subscription/service/SubscriptionResourceIT.java
:kogito_sw_newsletter_example_subscription_service_pom: {kogito_sw_newsletter_example}/subscription-service/pom.xml

This document describes how to test your Kogito Serverless Workflow application integrated with PostgreSQL persistence.

.Prerequisites
* A completed Kogito Serverless Workflow application working. More information available in {getting_started_create_first_workflow_guide}[Creating your first Serverless Workflow service] guide.

> * Enable the application persistence using PostgresSQL. More details in {persistence_with_postgresql_guide}[Kogito Serverless Workflow Persistence with PostgreSQL] guide.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Enable the application persistence using PostgresSQL. More details in {persistence_with_postgresql_guide}[Running Serverless Workflow service using PostgresSQL] guide.
```
I'm updating the guide tittle

details see link:{quarkus_testing_guide_integration_test_url}[@QuarkusIntegrationTest] guide.
* *Quarkus Dev Services* facilitates writing integration tests that need launching services to support the application. More explained in link:{quarkus_testing_guide_launching_containers_url}[Testing Quarkus application - launching containers] guide.

*@QuarkusIntegrationTest* works out of the box with the additional containers launched via link:{quarkus_dev_services_url}[*Quarkus Dev Services*].

[[proc-test-sw-application-postgresql]]
== Testing a Serverless Workflow application with PostgreSQL persistence

.Prerequisites
include::../../pages/_common-content/getting-started-requirement.adoc[]
* Enable the application persistence using PostgresSQL. More details in {persistence_with_postgresql_guide}[Running Serverless Workflow service using PostgresSQL] guide.
* Docker is installed.
* link:{postgresql_url}[PostgreSQL] is installed. For information about PostgreSQL installation and configuration, see link:{postgresql_doc_url}[PostgreSQL documentation].

[NOTE]
====

> Although PostgreSQL installation is mentioned as a requirement, this guide relies on running it as a Docker service instead.

Reviewer 3: @nmirasch I think we can drop this note and requirement because we're actually asking people to use devservices instead.

    <scope>test</scope>
</dependency>
----

.Awaitility
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.awaitility</groupId>
  <artifactId>awaitility</artifactId>
  <scope>test</scope>
</dependency>
----

`Awaitility` dependency allows the test to express time expectations of an asynchronous system.
For more information, see link:{awaitility_url}[Awaitility] website.

--

. Check PostgreSQL resources dependencies
+
--
The link:{quarkus_database_dev_services_url}[*Quarkus Dev Services for Databases*] will be enabled when a reactive or JDBC datasource extension is present in the application.
Ensure the Application's `pom.xml` has the dependency to the needed PostgreSQL resources:

.JDBC persistence add-on
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
  <artifactId>kogito-addons-quarkus-persistence-jdbc</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

.Quarkus JDBC PostgreSQL
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-jdbc-postgresql</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

.Quarkus Agroal Data Source
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-agroal</artifactId>
</dependency>
----
--

> . Enable Quarkus Database Dev services

Reviewer 3: @nmirasch I think here we should instead link to Quarkus. I think this can get outdated easily as Quarkus changes things, so we just need to tell users to make sure they are aware of the conditions, wdyt?

Author: makes sense!

> +

Reviewer 3: @nmirasch, I think we're missing the instructions to set up the failsafe plugin to run the IT tests?

--
The *Quarkus Database Dev Services* will start under following conditions:

* Quarkus dev services enabled, `quarkus.devservices.enabled=true` (enabled by default).
* Quarkus Databases dev services enabled, `quarkus.datasource.devservices.enabled=true` (enabled by default).
* Dependencies to a reactive or JDBC datasource extension is present, in this case PostgreSQL.
* No database URL configuration is provided.
* Application running in Test or Development mode.

For more information see link:{quarkus_database_dev_services_url}[*Quarkus Dev Services for Databases*] guide.

[NOTE]
====
Properties `quarkus.devservices.enabled` and `quarkus.datasource.devservices.enabled` let to enable /disable the *Dev Services*.
for more information see link:{quarkus_database_dev_services_enabling_url}[Enabling / Disabling Dev Services for Database] guide.
====

> The additional containers has a full set of default configuration, such as PostgreSQL docker image name, default user, default password.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The additional containers have a full set of default configurations, such as the PostgreSQL docker image name, default user, default password.
```

All the required configuration to link the Kogito Serverless Workflow service with the Quarkus Dev PostgreSQL container is added automatically to the integration test.

> Quarkus will provide properties as `quarkus.datasource.reactive.url`, `quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url`, `quarkus.datasource.username` or `quarkus.datasource.password` after starting the container.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Quarkus will provide properties such as `quarkus.datasource.reactive.url`, `quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url`, `quarkus.datasource.username` or `quarkus.datasource.password` after starting the container.
```
